trates as much functionality as possible in the leader. This approach results in a simpler algorithm that is easier to understand. For example, in Paxos, leader election is orthogonal to the basic consensus protocol: it serves only as a performance optimization and is not required for achieving consensus. However, this results in additional mechanism: Paxos includes both a two-phase protocol for basic consensus and a separate mechanism for leader election. In contrast, Raft incorporates leader election directly into the consensus algorithm and uses it as the first of the two phases of consensus. This results in less mechanism than in Paxos.

Like Raft, VR and ZooKeeper are leader-based and therefore share many of Raft's advantages over Paxos. However, Raft has less mechanism that VR or ZooKeeper because it minimizes the functionality in non-leaders. For example, log entries in Raft flow in only one direction: outward from the leader in AppendEntries RPCs. In VR log entries flow in both directions (leaders can receive $\log$ entries during the election process); this results in additional mechanism and complexity. The published description of ZooKeeper also transfers log entries both to and from the leader, but the implementation is apparently more like Raft [35].

Raft has fewer message types than any other algorithm for consensus-based log replication that we are aware of. For example, we counted the message types VR and ZooKeeper use for basic consensus and membership changes (excluding log compaction and client interaction, as these are nearly independent of the algorithms). VR and ZooKeeper each define 10 different message types, while Raft has only 4 message types (two RPC requests and their responses). Raft's messages are a bit more dense than the other algorithms', but they are simpler collectively. In addition, VR and ZooKeeper are described in terms of transmitting entire logs during leader changes; additional message types will be required to optimize these mechanisms so that they are practical.

Raft's strong leadership approach simplifies the algorithm, but it precludes some performance optimizations. For example, Egalitarian Paxos (EPaxos) can achieve higher performance under some conditions with a leaderless approach [27]. EPaxos exploits commutativity in state machine commands. Any server can commit a command with just one round of communication as long as other commands that are proposed concurrently commute with it. However, if commands that are proposed concurrently do not commute with each other, EPaxos requires an additional round of communication. Because any server may commit commands, EPaxos balances load well between servers and is able to achieve lower latency than Raft in WAN settings. However, it adds significant complexity to Paxos.

Several different approaches for cluster membership changes have been proposed or implemented in other work, including Lamport's original proposal [15], VR [22], and SMART [24]. We chose the joint consensus approach for Raft because it leverages the rest of the consensus protocol, so that very little additional mechanism is required for membership changes. Lamport's $\alpha$-based approach was not an option for Raft because it assumes consensus can be reached without a leader. In comparison to VR and SMART, Raft's reconfiguration algorithm has the advantage that membership changes can occur without limiting the processing of normal requests; in contrast, VR stops all normal processing during configuration changes, and SMART imposes an $\alpha$-like limit on the number of outstanding requests. Raft's approach also adds less mechanism than either VR or SMART.

\section*{11 Conclusion}

Algorithms are often designed with correctness, efficiency, and/or conciseness as the primary goals. Although these are all worthy goals, we believe that understandability is just as important. None of the other goals can be achieved until developers render the algorithm into a practical implementation, which will inevitably deviate from and expand upon the published form. Unless developers have a deep understanding of the algorithm and can create intuitions about it, it will be difficult for them to retain its desirable properties in their implementation.

In this paper we addressed the issue of distributed consensus, where a widely accepted but impenetrable algorithm, Paxos, has challenged students and developers for many years. We developed a new algorithm, Raft, which we have shown to be more understandable than Paxos. We also believe that Raft provides a better foundation for system building. Using understandability as the primary design goal changed the way we approached the design of Raft; as the design progressed we found ourselves reusing a few techniques repeatedly, such as decomposing the problem and simplifying the state space. These techniques not only improved the understandability of Raft but also made it easier to convince ourselves of its correctness.

\section*{12 Acknowledgments}

The user study would not have been possible without the support of Ali Ghodsi, David Mazieres, and the students of CS 294-91 at Berkeley and CS 240 at Stanford. Scott Klemmer helped us design the user study, and Nelson Ray advised us on statistical analysis. The Paxos slides for the user study borrowed heavily from a slide deck originally created by Lorenzo Alvisi. Special thanks go to David Mazières and Ezra Hoch for finding subtle bugs in Raft. Many people provided helpful feedback on the paper and user study materials, including Ed Bugnion, Michael Chan, Hugues Evrard,

